# **Assignment 8: Monads**

* **Q#01**:
  * Write refactored versions of the `validateNoDict` and `validateWithDict` functions we defined in **Assignment 6-2**, using (`>>=`) to compose the component validators (instead of manually case-matching/destructuring and propagating exceptions).

* **Q#02**:
  * Write an action `playGame` that takes a ***Game*** value and returns a unit value in the ***IO*** context.
  * This is the most complex piece of program logic, so read the following instructions carefully!
  * Using `do` notation, implement the following logic:
    1. Call the `promptGuess` action from the provided code.
    2. Use the `getUpperChar` action to get a move from the user and bind the result to a variable.
    3. Call `_SPACE_`.
    4. Apply `processTurn` and pattern-match on the result using a `case` expression. You'll need to write 3 different case patterns to handle the following possibilities:
      a. **The game is over:** in this case, print the game-over message (you defined this in the ***Show*** instance for the ***GameException*** type), then print a message informing the player what the correct word was. *Hint:* remember which adapter we can use to sequence two monadic actions when we don't need the result of the first action.
      b. **Any other exception occurred:** print the exception and call `playGame` recursively with the same ***Game*** value. We're creating a looped action that will repeat until the player enters a valid move or the game ends.
      c. **An updated *Game* value was returned:** in this case, the player has entered a valid move, and the game's "state" has advanced. Print the new **Game** value, then check whether the ***Guess*** field is equal to the ***Secret*** field. If so, print a message saying that the game has been won. Otherwise, call `playGame` recursively, applying it to the updated **Game** value.
        * *Hint:* remember when using conditional expressions like `case` or `if`/`then`/`else` inside a `do` block, we need to create a nested `do` block if we want to continue writing code in `do` notation!

* **Q#03:**
  * Write an action `startGame`, which takes a validator function (:: ***Secret*** -> ***Either GameException Secret***) as input and returns a unit value in the **IO** context.
  * This action should do 2 things:
    1. Receive a secret word from the player using the `setSecret` action, and bind the result to a variable.
    2. Apply the validator function (argument) to the ***Secret*** value supplied by the player above (this produces a value of type ***Either GameException Secret***); then apply `makeGameIfValid` to this result, and with a `case` expression, match on the two possible values this returns:
      a. **An exception occurred:** the ***Secret*** value is invalid; print the exception, then call `startGame` recursively, applied to the same validator argument.
      b. **A *Game* value was returned:** print the ***Game*** value, then apply `playGame` to it to start the gameplay.

* **Q#04:**
  * The `runApp` action is essentially the `main` action for our application. We are implementing it as a separate action because we will make an alternative refactored version of it later, and this will make it easier to switch versions of our code inside of `main`.
  * Replace the placeholder `putStrLn` action in `runApp` with an action that does the following:
    1. Call the `getDict` action you defined in Assignment 7 and bind its ***Maybe Dictionary*** result to a variable.
    2. Use a `case` expression to pattern-match on the result, defining patterns for the `Just` and `Nothing` possibilities.
      * If a **Dictionary** is found, partially-apply the `validateWithDict` validator to it, and pass the resulting function as an argument to `startGame`.
      * If no dictionary is found:
        * Print the following message: `"Missing dictionary file! Continue without dictionary? [Y/N]"`.
        * Then call the `getUpperChar` action you defined in Assignment 7, binding the result to a variable.
        * If the result is `Y`, apply `startGame` to the `validateNoDict` validator. We can use `if`-`then`-`else` for this, but there is monadic helper function lets us more easily perform an action conditionally like this, and returns a unit value inside the context when the predicate is `False`. Review the slides for Lesson 5 if you don't remember.
  * Your hangman game should now be fully functional! Try running `cabal run` in the terminal to play (if you're inside a GHCi session, exit using `:q` to return to the regular terminal).

* **Q#05: State Refactor Challenge**
  * Write refactored versions of the following functions, using the ***State*** monad:
    1. `makeGame` (A6-1)
    2. `updateGame` (A6-1)
    3. `repeatedMove` (A6-1)
    4. `processTurn` (A6-2)
  * The ***State*** versions of these functions all have an `S` at the end of their names to distinguish them from their non-state versions.
  * As we'll explain in the next lesson, we won't actually use these functions in our application, due to the difficulty we face trying to combine the ***State*** functionality with the functionality of the other contexts we're using (***IO***, ***Either***).
  * The purpose of this exercise is just to practice incorporating ***State*** into ordinary functions and using its utilities.
  * `makeGameS` should take a ***Secret*** value and return a value of type ***State Game* ()**. Like its non-state version, this function should produce the initial ***Game*** value. However, instead of returning it, it should use the correct ***State*** utility function to set the state to this value. Since this function only performs one monadic computation, it doesn't benefit from `do` notation: just call the right state utility, providing the ***Game*** value as its argument.
  * `updateGame`, `repeatedMove`, and `processTurn` all include a ***Game*** value as their second argument. Follow the ***State*** refactoring example from the slides to write new signatures for `repeatedMoveS`, `updateGameS` and `processTurnS`, removing this ***Game*** value as an explicit argument and instead returning a value of the appropriate type in the ***State*** context.
  * `updateGameS` should transform the existing state value (:: ***Game***) into an updated value. We can do this using the non-state version `updateGame`, applied the ***Move*** argument, which gives us a partially-applied function with signature ***Game*** -> ***Game***. Use the appropriate ***State*** utility to update the state with this function. Again, we don't require `do`-notation for this, since it's a single monadic computation.
  * `repeatedMoveS` should use a ***State*** utility and the appropriate selector to get the list of guessed moves from the state. Then check whether the ***Move*** argument is part of this list, and return a ***Bool*** value in the ***State*** context. Using `do`-notation may be beneficial in this case.
  * `processTurnS` will be the most challenging function, as we can't use a straight-forward series of guard patterns like we did for its non-state version. Here are some hints to help you:
    * It should return either a ***GameException*** or a `()` value, inside the ***State*** context.
    * Checking whether the input ***Move*** is valid doesn't depend on the current value of the state, so we'd like to deal with this case before doing any unnecessary work. We can write a separate function pattern for this as follows:
      ```haskell
      processTurnS move | invalidMove move = pure $ Left InvalidMove
      ```
       If the predicate in the guard isn't satisfied, this function pattern will be skipped; otherwise it will return an `InvalidMove` exception in the ***State*** context (note that we can use `pure` or `return` to lift the value into the context).

    * In another function pattern, create a `do` block and perform the following:
      * Call `repeatedMoveS` on the ***Move*** input, and bind the result to a variable.
      * If the result is `True`, return a `RepeatMove` exception in the ***State*** context. Otherwise continue (remember what we need to do to resume writing `do`-notation inside a conditional expression!).
      * Update the game state using `updateGameS`. Then use the correct ***State*** utility and selector to get the number of remaining chances and bind it to a variable.
      * If there are `0` chances left, return a `GameOver` exception. Otherwise, the game should continue: this means we return a `()` value inside the appropriate ***Either*** constructor. Don't forget to lift it into the ***State*** context!